it
that's all I
welcome. I got the D night to presented
solution here. And thanks
for the opportunity to dress the committee on I'm
such an important topic and especially someone who
probably raise concerns about the use of
entrance of three wooden's contacts last year as my
art submission signals. I stand
by those objections, especially because it
was an exceptional move in the light of our constitutional traditions.
And because it came somewhat out of the blue and they
don't think got the fear scrutiny. It deserves.
On the normative question about the future use of
entrenchment with this committee is considering I
have a relatively open mind.
But I'd be nervous about more extensive use because of the
change and the style of constitutionalism. It
would Usher in.
And to think about that, I think it's helpful to think about our constitution
as an ecosystem.
It's an a delicate state of equilibrium condition
by a mix of laws roles convention and
practice.
And adding in something almost alien when nobody was
quite expecting at risk upsetting things, especially
those important conventions protecting our
electoral infrastructure and also risk
entrant potentially being weaponized
politically.
It also risk transforming and and concretizing
our ecosystem from a
flexible responsive political Constitution to a
more rigid hierarchical legal Constitution
and eroding our
tourist principle of parliamentary sovereignty.
And taken further. It's a big step towards a
supreme Constitution like that proposed by
sugary Palmer and Dr. Andrew Butler.
And I'm perhaps not a fan of that.
Um what the committee should do?
I'm not convinced anything or much
is needed.
I think the three Waters incident highlighted conventional rules
within our constitutional ecosystem and
ultimately balance was
restored within those traditions.
Perhaps the committee might like to think about fortifying the
convention by tweaking standing orders.
But this is where it really gives gets tricky and and forgive me
if I'm not offering much help on this front other than say it's
hard because I'm conceptual or
typological roles governing approaches of a
trend entrancement are tricky whether the
restricted to a constitutional purpose or certain types of subject
matter, like key instruments
human rights and so forth in at
most I think the committee might want to think about procedural roles
clarifying the elevated majority needed
to entrance that would be a helpful move and
would I think restore or capture the
idea underline the convention that entrance to
be left for matters which are genuinely above politics.
And perhaps most importantly for a political Constitution ensuring any
proposal to entrance is given time
to breathe. So Hand cuffing's parliaments hand
covering parliament's legislative omnipotence has
done deliberately for the right reasons after being
properly socialized. I say a little bit more about some of
those possible tweaks in my written submission as well
as a little bit about the legal enforceability of
entrancement including the question of single and
Dublin Transformers, but I'm happy. I'm happy to
leave at the owners take Christians in the committee. Thank you Christians.
The picture
thank you. And I'm so page six you're talking
about adequate notice and that may be discretion by
select committee or and end or a minimum
period you spend on what you're
thinking what I mean in many respects
that the the committee will know the process and the
tools that allow things to to breathe and
have time to whether it's a proposal to
entrance should be only in bills that are introduced and that
for it has a staging process and debated under
udency or a good referred to sleep committee. I know other submitters have
particular and suggestions of whether special
debates and other things like that might be needed. I
think there's a range of things you could do the important
principle for me. Is that is that both?
parliamentarians
experts in the public get time to think it through so
it's done on a deliberate basis.
In the light of the The Proposal
that's actually proposed and I know that
for the this this instance here entrancement was
floated very early on but then appeared to
die off.
so that when it came to those of us that following the
the text and the processes through
it came out of the blue quite frankly and I think that
when everybody finally clued into that what
was going on, we saw a response here and and not perfect
world idea world that will be factored
into the to the leaders of process.
So you're agnostic about the type of the notice that
patiently some of that.
I think he was speaking. Thank you professor.
There's always very helpful and discussion contribution
including having initiated indeed. Um,
I was struck by the the helpfulness
of you setting out the different types of approaches. And
you say you lean towards the procedural approach. I wonder
if there's a combination between that and what you call the
typological approach, whereby to sort of decide where
it is that that you
know, what's the appropriate subject? We just say for
example, the whole of the Electoral act or or you know,
prescribed piece of legislation as opposed to saying, you know, simply important
matters, you know, so that, you know our friends from the green
party for example would you know argue it in with some weight
without reload again the substance of the issue that you know, that that's subject
matter was
Very important. So do you could you
see specific pieces of legislation for example being properly
the subject of entrenchment and and say
we draw the line then?
I think it's difficult because in some respects they
these meds will turn on your ideological matters about
you know, what's important in the state. Is it is it human
rights? Is it is it that the nature state is it's
the existence of local government as an
institution and things like that. Is it things like today? I
always important sort of expression of New Zealand.
I mean that these are debate points and what we're looking
for are things which are genuinely about politics
and above ideology in in
I I mean I can read that I could I could
debate from either side of in in and I
know but what I know within our current Constitution
and tradition as it's relatively more so in summer
speaks, it's avoiding those debates and that's
why I think the procedural idea of saying we need
a real elevator 75% perhaps more
referendum is going to
Restrict the class to those things where they are
Beyond debate. So I'm dodging your
question. Yeah, I think it's a really I think it's part of
the problem of why it's difficult using that as a load star. Yeah, whereas
the procedural load style will in some respects.
Go a few item with you guys. Yeah, thank you you turn this
age. Thank you continues on that thing because being
above politics
we need water to survive. So a
right to clean drinking water United Nations is considered.
It's not part of the decoration of Human Rights, but surely those
sort of fundamental things could also be
part of our
Arrangements that are potentially intrigued because some people would argue
that that's as important as our civil and political life plus
comment and sort of continue. I wouldn't
disagree with that. Although I think we've got to have the the time
for our community at the debate. Yeah, and and
to sort of identify if we're doing that we're opening
up a different Constitution much more akin to
the Bolivian constitutional those we're the rights in the environment protected. This
one was a particular interaction relationship
particular policy or Arrangements duration
to water which the mode of delivered. I mean if it
was abstract in terms of the writer the right to, you know,
clean water, you know, I think you might get a
more of a consensus per head. I don't know but I think you know,
I've been
It's these.
Within our current existing Traditions. It's
It's hard to see some of these things being above
debate or beyond your where there's
widespread some public support for widespread support which
I think is as a useful way to think about it, which
is what the protector at the procedural approach would
try and protect against so I mean, I can't sit here
and say ownership public ownership is is not a
constitutional matter because I've got a colleague from a different constitutional tradition
and Latin America. She's of God, we treat that all
the time but it's not how we do things here in New Zealand and and
I'm open to change and evolution of
our constitute of traditions. But if we start doing that we're
going to be taking steps towards as
they say that that Jeffrey Palmer Andrew about the style
of concerts. Will you lock everything down and that'll have
ramifications for the day-to-day politics and our constitutional
because
because that's thank you. I loved
your comment about the handcuffing the
otherwise have not omnipotent power of the legislature. It was my
favorite communion of all the submissions in the bottom of
page five you talk about threshold for
trenching.
Activity, I don't want to insert.
Wrongly are you saying 75% should
be?
A Minima the minimum it
could be higher or because that's quite different from
what's standing order 270 says now, I I read
the standing order differently to my Southern colleague
and another institution that I
sorry, but I
read that one is actually being a restricting power Northern empowering
power. I think that the the for me
that that the core of the convention
what was was above politics and that requires
elevated threshold 75 is
what we know from the electroact provisions, but there are other thresholds.
I think I referred to the one that's in the literal
finance and relation regulations with there's a Higher
One 75% plus half the leaders of all
the political parties. Well again, it's trying to capture that idea. When
is something genuinely about politics but
not require.
Unanimity or knee unanimity? I know that works in the business of committee,
but I think they'll be difficult on the floor of the house. So so
there's no intrinsic sort of brightness about
what the number is but in terms
of what we know in our templates 75% is
a good or a referender is a good template but
I do suggest I think that might be best as a minimum because you
may want to put it higher
As I say with, you know reflection of
the political parties, or it might be the requirement that go out to
public referenda rather than the house
help the job. Thank you.
Brooke
Yeah, kind of a question on the back of that one and
then my own one, but I'm interested in this this idea
of the 75% versus the near consensus because
is it possible or plausible
that if you needed 75%
you could in fact have the larger parties creating
a constitutional change that harms the
minor parties and you know
in a way that might be in a political manner not
a constitution and I think that's the reason
I think it's a fair consideration of something thought about in
different contexts. For example, if Parliament chose to
nominate the government of general or
the hopefully a new head of state through through a sort
of a consensus model, what would you do to ensure that there
was as much as possible lack of the scene
but not ensuring and requiring unanimity
because you wouldn't want one
member or two members you're holding that the matter
to rent some so but I think that idea of seventy five
percent that's plus half of the political parties would
avoid the two main political parties doing
a deal that would disadvantage the minority pages
and if you look at the the article
the Barb
Article protecting the minorities as one of
the rationale's is often used for an entrenchment. So
the threshold may be out of playing
to that slightly.
Because I was just piggybacking off that one and I'm interested
on page two and you said the manner
in which the entrancement Clause was adopted was
an appropriate and we've spoken to
your desire for there to be a bit
more transparency through the select committee process.
Are you also advocating them for it to
not be allowed to have a Amendment Committee
of the whole house with an attachment course because
that I'm I'm not sure if the clothes
on that as long as the matter or the
proposal was able to be to breathe and
be socialized and and in I think
there's technical ways you might have been able to look
at that whether the if the proposal would Arisen and committee stage
should that have been separated from the
bill and continued as a separate bill. So it
got you know was returned to sleep committee
and was given time and given specific debate or something
like that again. I'm not I'm not a
I'm not all over the the technical parts of the Stanley
goes is forgive me. But but because you'll know the bit but something of
that kind, I think there are ways through to ensure the
principle is adhered to that the proposal is
given the debate it and scrutiny
it needs and it is a minimum I think selecting this excrucially,
I'm not sure which committee should do it. Maybe it's
this committee. Maybe it's the subject committee. Maybe
it's the Committees together but time in
scrutiny in I would add or
I mean you people time for the media and the public to catch
up with what's going on so that the voice is a good
Chris Bishop you thank you.
Something that I found interesting during the
whole debacle in the last year was there's a
comment in McGee.
Quotient Joseph. I think that
courts would decline to enforce
Substantive purported entrenchment of
substantive policy matters is that
your understanding of what the courts would do.
I don't know and then that's the
short point is we don't know what we know is that
we're relates to electral Provisions, which have
widespread support which have a
long standard tradition. We expect the courts
will enforce them, even though they haven't quite
ruled but they've almost said everything but
you throw other complications into the mix
and we risk that being upset, you know,
if it is used for matter, which doesn't have that widespread support.
We're gonna hit the courts are going
to make it judgments about whether the entrance has legitimacy
as a constitution tool such that they
should enforce it.
There aren't guarantees there and we don't know because we're covered
would be carving out new territory there and that's partly why
I'm worried about it's here because I start reefing you here on those
policy matters. Are they going to rethink it here in the
Electoral stuff that we cherish?
it
he can ask us is that because of where the entrenchment
currently sits and standing orders as opposed to for example Constitution at
which you've sort of floated the possibility on.
if it's
a different if
I'm not I'm not sure. I'm not sure I can
answer that. I'm not sure where it is, especially matters.
There are nods and signals to the other institutions that
would come with that. And
I think yeah, I think
that's probably what I should say this and I'm thinking okay, it's
me. The last question. Thank you.
Just wanted to go back to your proposed minimum for entrenchment you
see and the other provision that you feed to
on the natural finances. I just wondered with the I think
the 75% and has been well to use but the support
of least half of Hades in the house. Do you
feel that that would always reflect the Democratic mandates
to make laws just and respect to
the immunity environment. We're quite possible having say a
single person parties and I've got
a question around, you know, would that include people
who were perhaps individuals not necessarily presenting
political parties in maybe the little
financing.
Was specifically looking at parties because
it's specifically dealt with political party donations.
So I just wanted to just unpack
that away. I think it's it's a proxy
and and it's a proxy which it which smart
people have have developed another
area. Does it fit our you know
the composition of parliament now?
Probably but you know, if you're thinking
about that, I'd be I'd be running ruler to say how did that work under
the you know, all the terms and Department whose voice
would be left out. Is it likely I mean you could play around
with that. It's simply a starting point. I mean you want
to make it a minute. It's a bit like
Goldilocks not too hot not too and not go
not too cold. Just right getting that sweet spot in terms
of what yeah how your handcuffing is is quite
difficult given especially we have a pretty Dynamic, you
know party political, you know individual MP system.
You want to try and make some eyes
the sense of everybody's voice being heard without wanting to
you know lock that down completely so that
the so that the Met has held to rent some
Thank you Doctor night for your session and children. Thank you.
Thanks.
Members doctor sorry Kenneth
Keith is unable to be with
us. All right, and so
we'll go straight to the legislation design in
advisory committee.
present not poison
Just a Jeffrey.
All right. Yes, like all
risk worth and Jonathan Orton. Yeah.
Tenacoso Mr. Chair. Thank you. Can you hear us kildra? Thank
you. Welcome to standing order select committee.
We have with giving
you 10 minutes. So if you'd like us to ask
questions, we have to leave some time at the end
of it. So, you're welcome to your suppression.
Thank you very much to cheer. I'm Jonathan upendall
and I'm a member of the legislation design and
advisory committee and I'm appearing here this evening with
my colleague Paul rushworth Casey. Who's also
a member of ldac as members
will probably know ldac has been given a mandate by cabinets
to review it just sort of proposals and bills and
introduced to ensure consistency with the
legislation guidelines. Our focus is on legislative design
and can the consistency of legislative proposals
with the guidelines as you'll be aware from
our written submission. We've made three recommendations first
that standing orders amended. So
that entrenchment is restricted to constitutional matters
second to provide a
process for focused parliamentary debate and scrutiny other
than trenchment ozils, including opportunities for
the public to provide import and thirdly to restrict
and trenchment to cases where at least a majority of 75%
of all members.
or entrenchment
what we thought we would do is briefly give the
core reasons for those recommendations and then
leave you some time to answer any questions
that you may have and I'll on that basis and
let Paul deal with the first issue in
relation to restriction to constitutional maths.
Thank you, Jonathan and good evening members
of the committee. Are you hearing me?
If so.
In our written submission, which I won't go
through Clause by clause or try to read but the very
first heading and our submission.
And seven there is involved
are there any conventions principles or cases that the
committee should take account of?
and then there's a
Guys, don't a paragraph 15. I want to just to summarize that
really by saying that.
The question of whether something should be entrenched is in our
constitutional arrangements as Dr.
Knight said very much something of
evaluation and judgment
and as I read the current standing order the one that we're talking about
possibly adjusting or tweaking.
What it's really saying when it says if if you are
purporting to entrench something then he should have the
same majority as you were going to impose on future parliaments to
repeal it.
But what's implicit in that standing orders that
the Constitutional judgment as to
whether entrenchment is legitimate in a
particular setting has already been made.
And now standing orders just turned
to a matter of technique rather
than judgment.
It's possible to read that standing water as it
stands.
As if it is somehow
empowering that if you do enact
something and entrench it with the same majority as
your requiring then it will be valid but I
don't think the standing order was ever intended to be read like
that. It was always if you have made
the Judgment that something is is legitimately entrenched
because of its constitutional significant. Then you
should have the same majority as
you're imposing and I think if you didn't have the same majority
as you are imposing any future
case for a court, we're looking at it and saying it's just
the sort of entrenchment that works that we should uphold then
the fact that it was imposed by a lesser majority
that actually demands the future
parliaments might be one factor that consider in
saying that it doesn't effective and
transmit.
No, when it comes therefore to a proposal to
change that particular standing order.
And given this a recent history is to you
know, a use of
it.
then
the eldex proposal is
that well outstanding orders
aren't designed to have changed the law about things.
Still less constitutional law.
But they should reflect so far as possible
the Constitutional values that we have and so
in a standing order that's about how you entrance something
when you've made the Judgment that you are
going to entrench it.
Then the standing orders should signal that well, you
only do it in matters of constitutional significance. So
that's the reason for the first proposal.
And I think that the second and third
proposals the ones that Jonathan was going to speak to you. I could just stop
at that point and take questions. But my
main point really has been that the question of entrancement is
and always has been and will remain a question
of judgment.
and it's very difficult to
legislate for judgment and things like standing orders, but
standing orders should at least reflect the
the judgments that need to be made. That's why
the limitation the Constitutional matters is
suggested.
my question
are you ready for questions? Yes. Okay. We've
got the honorable Michael Ward house.
Thank you Paul and Jonathan, I don't
want to misunderstand what you've just told us Paul, but it
seemed to me that you were saying that the standing orders
should give procedural effect.
to a constitutional decision that
had already been made
or words to that effect that actually standing
orders shouldn't be the ones to prescribe the what
or it simply says if you want to
make an entrenchment change, this is how you do it.
We're then would that.
agreement, otherwise be sought and
given
because
we the debating chamber is the place to pass rules.
So I just I don't want to misunderstand what you
would telling the commit it. Would my understanding what you
were saying? Yeah. Well, I mean to put to be
more specific about it. I think everybody would agree
that there are certain things that
and our tradition we have entrenched and that is a rational
and reasonable thing to do and they are
things about the electoral system and how laws are made.
And those are things that should likely be changed by
a 50% majority and we're
limited those to a small category.
and our political morality
or constitutional morality as evidence
evidence and how we behaved in the past is that
we've limited entrenchment to those sorts of things but
not to policy choices about how
particular
Local Authority should be organized and so on
and so forth because I guess we
instinctively recognized that it would be wrong for any
particular majority to say look. Here's what
we've done. And if you go to change that you need 70% or
we happen to have 70% ourselves. So
let's just Avail ourselves of that standing order and and
pass this law that entrenches what
I'm saying is that standing order was never
designed just to say when you want to do it. Here's how you do it. It always
assumed a preliminary judgment as to whether
what you are trying to entry or think ought to be entrenched does
have that constitutional character that
pertains to the lawmaking process.
Yeah, and you I think it was your submission that talked
about in the past a super
majority having been achieved but because it wasn't unanimous Parliament
decided not to go ahead with
it. Was that your submission? I don't think that was I
might have been sickness.
Okay, I'm still a little confused, but that will be
my issue. Not yours.
can I
can I add to what all is said and
picking up on your comments? I
think part of the point that we're making from ldac
is that in terms of where that judgment sits
that the standing orders don't function in the same
way as legislation themselves. They can always be suspended by
Parliament so that they
have more I guess of a moral or a political force
and it's obviously the case that this
committee is now considering our we should
Express the current constitutional arrangements and relation to
entrancement and they would therefore be reflected in the standing order. So
we're not suggesting that these proposals should be
reflected somewhere else, but I guess the point that we
also make is that that these aren't going
to be
Rules that can never be changed in
the same way or akin to something that was actually entrenched in
legislation, but it acts more as a
handbrake on what's going to happen that could be undispensable
than future but lays down a marker about a constitutional
judgment that this Committee, of course in conjunction
with the rest of your colleagues would ultimately making if
that helps answer the question.
at The Honorable Chinese age
Thank you, Mr. Chair. So in relation to our
constitutional system not becoming Frozen.
You're a risk.
Of the if matters that can be
entrenched are only related to the lawmaking process. Isn't that
meaning that we've got a frozen system that there's
no opportunity for it to evolve because it's a
very narrow range of matters, which can
be subject to entrenchment.
I've asked another submitter about the right to clean
water. Some people would see that as supremely important.
There are some of the suitable and political rights
and the Bill of Rights act. So how does the system
evolve if it is frozen just around the spirit
narrow sphere around lawmaking.
Well, my answer to
that would pick up aspects of what
Jonathan just said in the sense that
identity standing orders is the place that needs to
lay out the potential for
evolution and so on. So in
other words if there was a political will
At some point to entrench something
of a type that hadn't been entrenched before because
the the Judgment was that that is
legitimate and it's has sufficient consensus.
Then the fact that the standing orders as
we urge limit and Transplant
constitutional matters.
Wouldn't preclude the suspension of
standing order service to accomplish something that was judged to be
a good idea at the time.
Just that as Jonathan said that the standing
orders.
Write a lay dance of marker as to what
is legitimate and do so at the
moment by saying.
If there's to be entrenchment then use
the same majority as you're going to demand and what
we are proposing is that if that's to be changed then
there are two worthy changes
one is to make the figure something. Yeah
and limited to constitutional
but that's not a thank you.
That's just standing orders.
And that concludes a time for the submission. Thank
you very much.
Completely welcome to the
Parliamentary Council. Basically, they just want to enshrine the
convention.
I said he's like they want to try what we thought was the
convention because it's not used to sustainable.
It's crazy.
Welcome. Thank you allocated 10
minutes for this summer. Thank you very much. Welcome members
and I'm Cassie Nickerson and my colleague
Cal subson. He's talked to you today.
And as you know parliamentary Council Office has a statue of
objective operating high quality legislation. That's easy
to find using understand and that is the index
exercising stewardship Museum's legislation.
And our interest in this matter is very much about having
good lawmaking processes and that
support constitutionally sound outcomes for
New Zealand.
And you just legislation design advisory committee, and
we've seen this Mission and endorse it. How's going
to talk through our key points?
Great. So thank you and these points are very similar
to the ones made by DR Knight and the eldex.
So the starting point from our nldx submission
is that parliamentary sovereignty is a core part
of our Constitution and on its face and trenchment runs
counter to that principle.
And on that basis our viewers
that entrangement should be used sparingly and carefully.
They're also potentially adverse effects from on the quality of
law from from overuse of the treatment and our
submission. We identified two of these the first is that the ability
to amend limiting the ability to immed
legislation obviously and intentionally makes it
more difficult to keep that legislation up to date and
and for purpose so that means that
when Parliament that when Parliament is considering and trenchment it
needs to be take great care and identifying which sections and
which parts of sections the law that are being
entrenched.
The second is that which was an issue that was raised
with Dr. Notice that overuse of entrenching Provisions
risks undermining the
very protection that entrenchment affords. So if we
use entrenchment as a frequent policy
tool for the current majority than a
subsequent majority might legitimately amended trenchable
legislation despite the entrenchment and
that precedent effect undermines the
entrenchment of the provisions that everyone currently
agree should be interested. So those kind of the main
points
And we just to finish off very briefly.
And I think we're all a lot more informed about entrenchment then we
were and in that light of that the question
I guess is literate question as to whether or not sending orders really
need to be amended and I think
the danger of not addressing the
issue in a sense is that the current flexibility of
probably implies and level of permission that
we don't think really exist as the current current
state of constitutional pollution.
So
we think that there's a benefit
of codify if you like what the
What the current kind of sort of level of consensus
is really around the use of entrenchment both did
it be at a sort of 75% type level so a
level which does require a significant cross-party
level of agreement of the
kind that would only be on the most enduring of measures and
that reflects the nature
of the major big entrenched to be considered and to
be constitutional policy meter
and potentially something else that
would require a level of public input and notice a
special consideration by parliament of the fact of
entreatment itself.
Rather than just being embedded in the legislation. So that might be
a special debate. For example, or the matter being referred and
considered specifically by select committee. Which what
ldx is right? It's very much but it's yeah.
Sorry, so happy to take any questions.
Come on, thank you. I just had a question about your use of
the Tomb continuing parliamentary sovereignty. Yeah,
so it to me seems like
a slight variation on what would normally be considered in parliamentary
sovereignty on sign without the continuing aspect.
And your view does that strengthen parliamentary the
concept the constitution convention and
parliamentary sovereignty as strength
and through content through through that use of the root continuing
looking at it. Yeah. It's a small planetary. So
yeah. So Parliament Southern tea is the idea that
the next Parliament also is sovereignty and so
continuing parliamentary sovereignty shows why
that that thread
of sovereignty consumers?
Oh, I have a question that actually it
came up and Dr. Mike's question as well what he
described a single versus double and treatment and you've raised it
and of course not paragraph night, and I'm a
bit confused. So forgive my ignorance.
You talk about the risk that governments May seek
to amend despite the entrenchment by first amending
the entrance within substantive provision you you
described that as because if if a
treatment was used for policy rather than constitutional issues.
But don't we have that problem with some of the Constitutional Provisions
as well? Yes. Absolutely. Yes, and I
guess I mean I guess the point is that the level
of consensus around the most enduring constitutional
convention is so high that we think it's extremely unlikely
that those steps would be taken but not impossible just
a question is and we ran out of time
for Doctor night, but he might want to not to are you saying the Dublin treatment
should be in the standing orders? No, okay.
So then that just
relies thank you. That's really helpful. We're gonna
I don't know any yes, but we
may
I show you simply saying that we should still rely on
the good judgment of and practice in the house.
to not do what is technically possible but constitutionally
outrageous
Yes, thank you. Okay, that's really helpful. That's that's
right answer. I'm I'm casting my
mind back to those horrific cases that Professor Knight
taught me 20 years ago. What what is
the current legal legal understanding
from you in the Academy? I suppose
around the effectiveness of Double Entry.
I don't know if
we're quality, you know, there's unit of
view of it, but I suppose.
My only point would be that I think that the
strongest protection of constitutional conventions is
a kind of a careful.
And consensus driven approach to using them that they rely as
much on the consensus across and over a period
of time and respect for them as they
do for sort of you know.
That's probably the most important thing because nothing in New Zealand's Double Entry.
or at least purportedly
No, and the things that are entrench now
obviously not only very narrow but the cool foundations of Parliament
and it's Democrat, you know, it's they're so narrow and
they are focused around the things that make Parliament
legitimate goes to the heart of our voting system.
So
Yeah.
the questions
No, just a point so I
can be clear about what you're thinking is.
so
because you're here that if we passed a entrenched
provision on a policy matter.
That a future government might come through and say that
they want to amend that policy. The courts would say
that they can't do it because it had been in French.
The courts might decide that they can
do it, even though it is interested, but it's kind of discussion and
it also could undermine that concept
of entrenchment for a cool professionalism.
Thank you for your submission. Thank you.
We now hear from the New Zealand Law Society.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman
of members of the standing orders committee. I'm Deborah Angus.
I'm the convener of the public and
administrative of Law Society. And I'm also appearing with
my colleague Professor Philip Joseph of the role
of law committee. I think is a very soon and the
Law Society submission is
divided into two areas, which
is the appropriateness of the intention provisions
and clarifying the procedural
requirements. I'm going to address the the
nuts and bolts, which is the clarifying time. I'm hoping
that Professor Joseph is somewhere in the either joining
us.
specifically
how how's
School
right
Can you hear me? Yes. Yes.
Welcome. Can you see me?
Hello. Yeah, something's gone
wrong.
I do want to continue with your submission. Um, yes.
Perhaps we can perhaps I'll continue
with the nuts and bolts and when Philip is
able to join us. He will the the
really the main points that I want to make is that
there is room to clarify
the procedural requirements for So, this
is really what a standing orders for standing orders
are.
The rules of procedure of the house. And
so when you look at them, are there sufficient flags
are the good principles in
the standing orders to guide the the
whole issue about passing of
legislation and entrenching and the Law
Society submission is that it's really the significance
of entrenchment is lost at
the moment because the procedures only contained in
a provision that
deals with how you deal with proposals for entrenchment at
the committee of the whole stage. The terminology
is not well aligned in these some
discussion of this and submission. We're there
are certainly room for improvement where you
could deal with when does the voting
actually occur? How does the
majority requirement apply because
there are simply nothing at the
moment the standing orders
filled with voting add it proposals are
passed when using majority I will know
so there's no
issue in terms of linking anything and there's
something could be improved determinologies also
not well aligned it talks about
a proposal being carried at Committee of the whole because of course
the committee of the whole can't pass the legislation. It's a committee
of the whole cast.
The good thing is that the New
Zealand Parliament is not alone. You're part of a full
worldwide community of Parliament that has to
Grapple with these issues, you know
in New Zealand, there is only one entrenched provision
many parliaments have had
to deal with the situation where you've got a written
Constitution and so they might be proposals on
in some times on a regular basis about
how you mean that the entrench perversions
and so the submission sets
out some examples about this.
So the law societies suggests that these things
should be clarified in terms of
setting the level of qualified majority. That's really
a matter for the legislation itself. It
seems to be necessary to consider that
along with any of what the actual
proposal and what the legislation is trying to achieve. So it
doesn't really seem to be a matter in the
law society's view that would be addressed as a
procedural issue in the standing orders.
The third point is really that it's not an appropriate topic
to deal with during urgency and
there are many examples
in Dr. Night referred to this about having a
pause and that the chance
for reflection and the value of
having a select committee process can't be
underestimated the submission refers to
a number of examples in the regions where for example
constitutions actually require but to
be taking that say it the second reading and in
the third reading that free Jay Constitution actually requires
a select committee referral in
some other parliaments have changed this standing orders to
refer to Constitutional Amendments
must be dealt with at least
must have a consideration at a select committee.
So really don't underestimate the value of
a pause and the select
committee process.
The associated with that is
the Law Society submission that it's not appropriate to deal
with us sort of on the hoof and as an amendment
it Committee of the whole if there was a requirement understanding
order. So it's something that standing orders can
deal with at this time proposal needs to go and be
considered at a select committee. So if
there was that requirement then
If there was an amendment and produced in the was
it in so for
example, it was passed.
Or carried at the committee of the whole then
there should be a pause and they
could be referred back. You need to have a serious
Prospect of success that it's
going to actually succeed. Otherwise, you
might have the unfortunate result
that there are proposals put forward reachment
when yeah simply too
deal with their matter, but
the really the the main point
is that anything like this should be dealt with with some
degree of consideration can certainly
with public engagement.
And I don't know whether it's possible to hear from Professor
Joseph about the appropriateness.
Can you hear me? Yes we can
but you can't see me.
It's true. Okay. So what was the
question please?
Um Professor Joseph. Could you please summarize
the Law Society submission on
the approach? When is it appropriate to have an
entrenched provision and legislation?
Yes, a lot the rule of law Committee of which I'm a member was really
more concerned that the substantive question the
substantial question of what types of
legislation might legit to be made the subject of entrenchment and
that is of course a question. That was very
much triggered by the recent three Waters and trenchment proposal.
And so the Law Society submission on the substantive
Point quotes from the Constitutional and
minister of law text now just read it to you again, as I said actually
in our written submissions and I quite a
government through genuine if misguided belief in
its policies might resort to matter and form as insurance
against future repeal of its laws. Now when I
say men and form that is a another term for entrenchment and
it's for that reason that the law society believes that
the standing order sport to be amended. So is
to protect the the legitimate sphere
of constitutional and trenchment
And for that purpose a distinction must clearly
be drawn. It's a distinction between constitutional
process on the one hand and government
policy on the other now entrenchment is
legitimate to with regard
to the format that is to constitutional process to
protect the Integrity of representative democracy.
So the purpose of intrigion is
not to seek to future-proof government policies
against repeal by Future government
that is not the purpose of constitutional entrangement.
It's often referred to as Constitution and transient
because it's constricted to constitutional matters
to protecting the Integrity of the Constitutional system.
And that is why I think the recent three
Waters and changement proposals or attracted such
widespread opposition because the three Waters
of legislation really represents contestable and
indeed contested the gestation both National
and the Egg parties, though don't
Beautiful. They they oppose the three Waters legislation. So
there was not a broad consensus for entrenchment there. And what
is more it wasn't an attempt to protect constitutional process?
And we but maintain the Law Society maintains at such
legislation which actually sits out a substantive policy
position of the government that this legislation must
always remain amenable in the public interest amenable
to repeal or alterations some way
through the ordinary literature process and I make
reference here to standing order 140 which sits out
the default voting position and New Zealand Parliament
questions that carried on the voices I or
no by simple majority of the house
that is the general rule and exceptions in our
beliefs can only be made whereas an
attempt to protect the Integrity of the Constitutional system. So it's
not surprising perhaps that the only entrenching we
have in our law is in the
Electoral act. This is currently section 268 of the
literal egg. It's initially introduced way back in 1956 and
the earlier the legislation and it's reenacted
in the current statute. What it
does is to protect our electoral.
System from alteration by simple majority of
the government of the day. So the section 6268 it
sets out what it calls sixth Reserve sections
and then says that these can only be altered by a super
majority of 75% or through a successful
poll and a national referendum.
So that's the only example we have and typical
subjects of entrenchment Elsewhere include
these separate branches of government the three
branches the electoral system the independence
of the courts and bills of
Rights. I mean our Bill of Rights is not an entrenched instrument for reasons,
which were to take respect to 1990. But
most are entrenched instruments, which can't be amended
in the ordinary way other subjects might
include National symbols such as the flag national anthem
and national emblem such as
New Zealand coat of arms, but all of these are all by
constitutional genus if you like which are the proper
subjects of constitutional entrenchment
And now in part three I understanding
orders committee's points of interest. The question is posed.
Are there any conventions principles or cases that
the committee should consider in in examining
this question? So this really poses
the question could one say that there is a
constitutional convention that is a binding rule of
political obligation that in fact entrenchment the
only used to safeguard constitutional process
and not to Future proof substantive political
positions against future repeal. Well,
I think we look at the three Waters president the insult
evenly there is no such precedent because there's not
widespritic symptoms there that in
fact that particular subject of legislation could
not be entrenched. In fact, it's introduce I
think is my colleague pointed out by Amendment the
committee stage
of the house and was successfully carry, so there was
no widespread agreement that the
Could not be constitutionally entrenched.
But then we move forward and ask. Well did this whole
incident create a precedent? Perhaps a fresh
president or a rule constituent president? Because when
the number of public lawyers
objected to what was happening the government Revisited
the matter and withdrew then trenching provision so
did this create then through this raw constituent
president a fresh convention? Well, we
don't know the person we'd have to wait for some
future event. We're in fact the public attentions Again cast back
onto this issue. But what we can say is that in
principle, there is no dispute that in
fact substantive policy
positions of governments are not the appropriate
subjects of Constitution and trenchment we can
say that in principle. There is this provision
shouldn't be used to be Safeguard against future appeal. So
political policies are by definition contestable and
they should always remain on the table in the
subject to Revisited by ordinary majority.
Of the house. So we think
that the default voting Rule and section sanding order
140 should apply to all
substantive policy decision-making within the
house and entrenchment should be reserved
simply to promote constitutional Integrity
of process and and paragraph
2.15 of the Law Society
submissions. We make a recommendation that's
standing order 270b amended by
adding in a new sub-part 3
standing order 27 years
the entrenching standing order it requires, of
course any proposal for entrenchment to be itself carried
by being majority that has proposed for future and
initial appeal and we would suggest adding this
sub-part 3 to cure Professor
with gone five minutes
over the allocated time. Okay, we
That don't want to be rude, but the members have
read the the submission unless members
do want to continue and
to ask a question. We need
to go on to the next next submitter. I
had my two questions answered by the solution. So yeah, it
looks like members are set aside with the submission
and don't have questions very thank
you both. Thank you. Thanks professor.
We now have the it
would Wellness.
Hello can committee hear
me.
You got 10 minutes.
If you like to leave some time at the
end of your submission for questions members have
read your submission. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
I won't believe the written submission on
the Assumption that's being read. I guess just
by way of context. I really wanted to sit out
and the submission.
Why entrenchymators difficult?
Conceptually constitutionally, we are
the rubbers with trying to do this emphasize the
idea that actually we promote a lot of constitutional stability
in the absence of entrenchment and that usually works
really really well.
And to really frame the question in a way
that the issue before the committee in a way that I think clarifies a
lot of the issues which is rather than thinking about the legal
effectiveness of entrenchment.
What would it take for a future Parliament to think? Hey actually
You know something constitutional has happened here and
we ought to rest we ought to respect the the
if it had entrenchment that has been made by a previous
Parliament.
Other than that, I guess I would say while I have set out some specific
recommendations largely around process. So the
sorts of ideas we've heard around having some time to breathe
making sure the issues are very well exposed to the public
for debate that sort of thing. I have
made some specific amendments. I'm not particularly wedded to the detail of
that. I think the system largely works. Well, I
think being governed by convention and just good
Common Sense by a politicians carries us very
long way and I think it can continue to
do that. I wanted to try and be helpful and and put
some process type. I recommendations to the committed
to consider, but certainly not weird to
the absolute detail of that. So with that being
said happy to take questions from members of the committee.
Did not patient.
Well just bringing people. Thank
you very much and appreciate you very clearly articulated
submission. I was interested in your
points here regarding a vet by the Attorney General ten
of it. And yeah, you can't see but other
colleagues indicating they're interested in that too. I wonder if
you would suggested a particularly outcome for
that be be required or merely that the house
through the or you know, it's gonna say it's tuned it's
mine to it rather the attorney has tuned and has all who mine to it
and whether or not at steams that is consistency
or not.
I guess.
I was really obviously inspired by standing order
269 which does the same thing in the Bill of
Rights context. I think it's less about putting faith
in the attorney to say Hey, I've thought
about this and I think it's okay. I think it's actually about
a focal point for discussion. So the the attorney
someone who represents the government who's responsible for this
proposed in the event is I've actually thought hard about
this year. There are there are issues but I
think for these very clearly articulated reasons
that it's an okay thing focusing on debate around
whether or not those articulated reasons credible carriers
far enough, that's actually where the debate
should be. I think so it's about having a focal point for debate
rather than putting sort of
the attorney on the spot and saying it's your job to make sure this works
I mean
The governing parties Everybody by proposing legislation assumed on some
level that it works and I'm not asking the attorney to go further than
that, but I just think it seems to be a very useful clarifying.
mechanism or public and political debate
to happen around
Thank you for helpful.
Just we suff on that Dr. Willis.
It seems to me that if we use Bora as the
framework, it's going to require some Amendment because I
would expect the Attorney General might be considering.
whether the various
constitutional boxes have been
ticked if you like or whether a proposed amendment goes
outside.
What could be a restriction that's probably
outside of section seven or six feet. So
we'd have to change the law to make that happen. They could
just put it standing orders.
You just
but it's not a human rights issue necessarily. That's what
I'm trying to point out. It could be a constitutional issue not
human rights issue. I haven't thought hard about whether
or not a statue Amendment would be required to carry that.
All right. I'm not saying we we folded into
the authority that their Journey the attorney currently has
under Section 7 or
right I'm saying would be a separate Authority advice on
that.
The Chinese city, right? Thank
you Mr. Speaker. Um, thank you Dr. Willis for the very thoughtful
submission. It's around the issue. You
raise about rights like the right
to clean drinking water and the risk
that the constitution becomes Frozen around
issues such as
the Democratic process in our representative to
democracy. So will you setting out in your
constitutional process section ways and
which what could be seen as a
key part of the constitution in terms of fundamental rights could
be expanded and it's just what is the role
of parliament in debating issues to
actually be able to avoid the Constitution
becoming Frozen and to be a bit more embracing
as other countries have done in terms of socio political
rights and basic rights like the right to
clean drinking water.
I don't think there's anything in my submission certainly from
the perspective from which I wrote it that would be ossifying the
Constitution osifying our our selection
of Rights in a way that Parliament couldn't address those
if we'll start at the
start of particular political parties or activists want to
expand the range of rights that are protected. They can
make a case for that then get a parliamentary party
support for that try and find a majority have a
discussion framing it as a constitutional issue
and something that needs broad spectrum buy-in either
across the political spectrum and a bipartisan political
sense or from a vast majority.
Maybe not a vast but a majority of the public who really back
that one of the issues, I think with the way
the the three Waters propose entrenchment was presented
was it wasn't necessarily presented and constitutional terms
after the fact there was a number of comets
with people sort of said well actually having reflected on
this I think it is actually of constitutional significance and actually kind of like the
Idea, and that's great. But that sort
of has that debate needs to happen before the amendment is
tabled.
And that would be sort of the big process concern. I have around that. Thank
you.
Yet just by clarification then it would say in your paragraph
23. I think if you assigned that a lot of things could be
constitutional that there's not necessary black and
white line for everything. Oh, what is a policy issue protein
is Constitution of but the
way that we talk about it is as the
more important matter.
Yeah, I I think generally entrenchment should
be used sparingly. I'm not trying to expand the sort
of the grasp here, but I
don't have a monopoly on what is the
side is constitutional on what's not with all your respect members
of the committee don't have a monopoly on it. It's really for us to discuss and
decide as a nation. And so really what I'm saying is we need
process that allows us to do that. And if we agree
that, you know, the Corpus of
fundamental rights go from here to here.
Great, like let's do that. If there's buy-in from the
right people across as I said broadbased support.
fantastic result
Any further questions?
Well, thank you very much for your submission real
pleasure. Thank you. Thank you. We now
have Graham. It's
Thank you for having me back welcome and
we're free here your submission. Yes
a much shorter submission than my last one to
this Committee. Just take any
questions. I think I've put it relatively simple. I
think some of the process things could be cleared up and just made
slightly more obvious. I think one of the earliest admitters suggested these
should all goes at the sugar
was slick committee and I agree with that with a hips and the bill is introduced
or in a supplementary and Order paper specifically referred to
Slick committee. I think that sort of process thing fix up
fixes that most of the concerns that you would have around use of
urgency or things like that. If something has gone to a slick committee the fact
that the committee of the whole stage might then be under urgency
or extended settings as a matter of concern we've had
and people have known in advance of the Slick committee, you know closing its
submissions that this was one of the things that specifically in
it, you know, people will have had their chance to ever say I'm on
the question of
Think I might take a slightly different view than others on the question
of what is a fringement supposed to be for it's supposed
to be for the things that you know politicians decide.
You know, New Zealand. I suspect will never entrenia a
right to the Beer arms, you know, we have the
Bill of Right 1688 which kind of has one only for Protestants not
Catholics. Yeah, and that's still around
me. But those sorts of things, you know, the types
of things that can be constitutional and nature can be
quite broad. That would be one sort of on a particular
side you sort of the the rights of of the
environment sort of things that you have in a
number of sort of South American constitutional documents are another
type of thing and yet that's a political argument to
have and maybe at some point, you know, we're we're discussing
what types of things should be entrenched. The question is really
well. If much more should be interesting we
have now, it's the question isn't you know, what should parliament's rules be. What
should the houses will be should we have written constitution on and what
things should we put in it and I sort of The Proposal.
From Andrew Butler and Jeffrey Palmer
you sort of one of the things that ported over was the statutory
right to education in the Education Act, which is one of
the rights we have which isn't in the Bill of Rights sort of expressed as a right.
There's like, yes, that's so important that it should be there. I don't see reasons
why public ownership of certain assets or things
like that couldn't be in there as well and you wouldn't even necessarily have
to have 75% of parliament to do it because you
know, that's how we got entrenchment in
1956. That's not why the electrol X 1993
is in French the electric 1993 isn't French just because
the public voted.
The public had voted against it the fact that 100% of MPS had
voted for it wouldn't have made a difference would still be under under
a much older act which is
I think the sort of the technical bit I mentioned at the end is one of the important factors
of infringent that we have that isn't currently recognized
in the way. They're standing order is written is that entrenchment isn't
only a matter that Parliament or the house
deals with it's something that a government could pass with a simple
majority but needing sort of the say
so in agreement of members of the public and so the type
of thing we had with three Waters or something like that if there was a party
or a group of parties for whom this sort of ownership
structure is so important that a future Parliament shouldn't
be able to do this itself. I don't know that New Zealand
context did ossifies things in the particular sense of well.
Future Parliament could just amend it the 50% plus one as
long as it went to a referendum and so sort of
taking account of that as something New Zealand doesn't have States and so
the difficulty that you have another countries in Australia and amending the
Constitution where you need a majority and a majority of
states or the United States and other places like that,
you know, you know, we have entrenched sections and
we have amended them and we do it with a simple majority of
public vote.
Happy to take any questions. So thanks the
that point about referenda. I'm
still trying to get my head around. So I'm because I had a belief
that it had to be a constitutional issue and supported
by a referendum. Now
what you've raised as possibility that it could be a policy issue supported
by a referendum. We've had referendums finding
citizens initiative referenda.
On numbers of firefighters were
salaries for nurses. Yes.
Now they're not buying them. So so my two
questions are do they need to be a binding referendum in which
case you're actually having to pass a law to set up
a reference.
and doesn't need to be a constitutional issue with
a binding referendum because you doesn't matter
what mandate it's given you're entrenching future parliaments,
which is what we're trying to avoid if
On issues that are not constitutional it
doesn't matter how we get there. The question is how
do we unwind it if indeed a future Parliament thinks
that's not appropriate. Well, the way that
a future Parliament could deal with it would be passing a
simple a build by simple majority setting up
a referendum, right? You need a referendum to
reverse or 75% majority would be
math assistant if Parliament wants
we have the electric 1993 because it
was passed by a simple majority at a public referenda.
is not stop Parliament amending it for the reserved sections
of it with a 75% majority it can and
I don't think it has yet. But it could you have questions about you.
If one reason, you know the four year term or something like that
the section of the Constitution Act which is entrenched and so
you could have changes like that and they
could be entrenched in Parliament could do it by 75% or if
Parliament couldn't get agreement but you know one of
the future similarities you will hear the voting age or
something like that. It might be a long time before you get a 75% buying
for the voting age or some sort of thing like that
and you might even send it to a referendum. I would
oppose that I think for that type of question. I'm just
sort of factually if you're voting on rights or something like that Minority. It's
particularly but that's sort of question is is the
way of doing it and the question of whether it's a constitutional issue
or not.
I think there are additional parts of the Electoral act
that should be entrenched the existence of MMP
itself being that the most obvious one perhaps the
size of parliament or something like this. It's weird
the wax written the joint party vote electorate voters
kind of in there because the section which creates the secret
ballot says you go into the voting booth
and you cast your party vote in your electric boat and you
know, so you could go to supplementary member
with a simple majority and you know, you won't and all good. Yeah,
but yes,
yeah.
But yes, so that sort of thing. I think this
should be more entrenched. I don't know that I support a written Constitution.
But if you have a written Constitution, you will
have the types of arguments of you know, what counts as
Constitution and what counts as constitutional at the six
sections we entrench it's a lot more than that the existence of course isn't
interesting New Zealand, you know, and perhaps justifiably
so because we don't want the sort of written Constitution that even Australia or
Canada. Yes you
oh any further questions you thank you
for having me. I think they take scrap. Thanks.
Now here from make it
16.
Oh, yes. So good
allocated you 10 minutes. If you'd like to leave some
time at the end for questions members have
previous question. I'll give it
a go. I took practicality. I'm Thomas.
I'm the league one possibly for like staying.
I'm perhaps don't have some of the experience on
knowledge and constitutional law that some of the other submitters have
had today and that to start my fourth year of the
law on his degree and I spent enough time and Dr. Knight's
classes to know a little bit about things but what
we do have as an organization is a
pretty unique perspective on this particular
kind of issue because we are and trying to change and change
provision at the moment and have been for the last few years.
So there's two principal submissions that we have
for the committee firstly we really want to emphasize that
human rights should be at the Forefront of the thinking around
and trenchment and should really be part of the process right
from the beginning and all the way through we should be thinking about you. Right and
the second thing is that we should
make sure that the entrance provisions and what
is in trenched and substance of them is always under review
because we want to make sure that we're always looking at
those those Provisions again.
But just before I dive into that, there's two sort of
preliminary points that I wanted to make. The first
one is.
The committee has the ability to make changes
in a number of ways here and two
of them. One of
them is the obvious the changes to standing orders and
the kind of hard or stuff maybe harder than right. Would
you know what? I mean? And then the other one is actually what's
written in the report has quite an impact on the
kind of conventions and lawmaking that we
as a society and and our constitution
is really built on and so what the
committee includes and it's report and shouldn't be understated in
terms of importance.
The other preliminary point I'd like to make is really
about the history of this and I was thinking that maybe I
might skip this bit because it might be brought up
and Traverse in detail, but it hasn't quite been as
much because we really when
we go back to 1956 and we think about how these Provisions
got here in the first place and how we got entrenchment. We
got it in a 10 day select committee process
with no public submissions and then it went back
to the house and then they passed everything under urgency
in one night.
Now that's not great. It's not
by any modern lawmaking standard a good way to make
legislations. Definitely not a good way to make such significant constitutional
legislation. And so I'll be
returning to that.
And a bit but the only real conversation that
we got about some of the substance of that was something
that was said by who was an
ash who was then the leader of the opposition when he
talked a little bit about perhaps trying from constitutional principles. Sorry
from democratic principles by including
the voting agents and then trying to provision and we think
that's a real problem that the voting age and specifically
lowering the voting ages and entrenched provision. We don't
think that it's right that for example in
order to take away the right
to vote for a huge number of people say if we take away
the right to to vote for women would require
51% of apartment technically probably at
unlikely that whatever eventually hopefully but it's
possible whereas to
give the right to vote to a whole bunch of six and 17
year olds requires 75% and we
don't think that comparison is fair.
So in this in terms of the substance of submissions, we have
firstly human rights is really
important a lot of the dialogue around entrenchment focuses
on the rules of the game
and that kind of angle into it. We think
that that misses out a significant portion of
the point of Human Rights. So the
point of entrenchment which is to protect human rights and ultimately entrenchment
should be the friend of
Human Rights and not its enemy. It shouldn't be making it
harder to to protect human
rights.
particularly when we talk about democracy a lot
of the things that are that are entrenched we're talking about, you know,
not increasing term lengths that lengths were
talking about a
Maybe making sure that the boundary drawing
is is independently done. Those kind
of things are things that protect Parliament that
protects the public and protect the citizenry and
the voters from Parliament taking away
power from the voters decreasing the scope of democracy and
and that kind of thing. Whereas when
we talk about something like the voting age we're
talking about something which does the opposite increases the
scope of democracy. We're giving more power to more people and taking care
away from Parliament and making the system more democratic.
And so I think and make 16
things that we've got this real responsibility where we
talk about entrenchment to make sure that what we
are doing is not making it harder to do
more democracy and to do more human rights and
we should be thinking about those things alongside each
other.
Is about keeping the internet
provisions and what is entrenched under review a
lot of this come back to that history because we
we can't really sit
here and pretend that things that were were
passed. You know, really 70
years ago are always going to be
absolutely perfect and Society changes
as we go along and our laws and our entrenched
law as well should be able to change with it when we want
it to but it can't do that. If we have the insurance
Provisions as a kind of thing set up
and stone that we Revere and we look at and
we just never change because it's sort of almost God like what we
need to do is make sure that we keep it under review. We should be
having perhaps that's done by select committee
review every one or two terms. Maybe three terms perhaps
it's done less formally than
that, but the important bit is
that we keep looking at it.
Was when things like the voting age come up and
of course, you know, this is an issue. We've got
the Supreme Court and has weighed in on and we've got significant human
rights implications around as well as lots
of public policy stuff going on. We
need to be thinking about making sure
that what our entrance Provisions are doing is not always
getting in the way when societies
attitude start to change. So we need to keep that
under review and make sure we keep looking at it.
That's all the submissions from
me. Happy to take any questions.
No, just just a question about you know,
when you're talking about society's views shifting and I
think we've heard some previous submitters about the
need to get the process right for winning society's you
does, you know as a nation change and what
level would you actually think is acceptable
for it to be considered that Society
had formed in your opinion. There's different
to what's been entrenched as a constitutional, right?
Yeah, and that that largely depends on what Society is
thinking about the time to be honest with you. There's no
concrete answer to that question because the way
that our constitutional dialogue works is pretty Broad
and and it changes and that's
a good thing for the reasons that we've just been talking
that I've just been talking about and we want to make sure that it's open
and that it continues to evolve so I
don't really have a concrete answer for that question. Sorry. I don't
think there is one. I think it should be one.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. Thank you very much for your very clearly presented
submission. I wonder and tell
me if I'm wrong obviously, but I wonder if you're really in
wanting to argue that this should not
be any entrenchment whatsoever. I just wonder if if you can
cast almost any law in terms of Human Rights and therefore
right? I mean, you've you've made
a if I may say and you know, really intelligence suggestions along
the lines of you know, review five to ten years or other ways
to have that ongoing protection against
and baking in or ossification or
freezing of laws. But in my
understanding correctly that instinctively yet. You don't like the idea of enrichment itself.
Not necessarily as an organization. We don't have
a position another entrance provisions.
The thing that we think is particularly important and
different about the voting ages one is is the
thing that I was talking about before around the idea of increasing
versus decreasing the scope of democracy the idea
of enhancing versus I'm going against
human rights and there's not necessarily A submission
here that every time that
there's any kind of approach that gets close to Human
Rights. We should completely lie it, you know, we completely run
away from it, but it needs to be part of the thinking and needs
to be part of the process and then at least a part of the process
at the time and then later on we'll reviewing it as well. And so
that we make sure that it's always kind of at the Forefront of
what we're thinking about so that we don't end
up in a situation like we do for six and 17
year olds. Now where the force to either ask
a bunch of people who can vote
whether they can vote as well or ask
some people that they couldn't elect and didn't have a choice
and electing whether they get to vote for
the next.
One we can if we can try
and avoid that kind of situation in the future by having that conversation
and think about human rights right from the start then that
probably will make a healthy democracy. Okay. Thank
you.
Thank you.
We have the House of Representatives.
Thanks Mr. Speaker. Um, so I
really wanted to focus on the second part of
my fairly brief submission. I will just start by saying no,
he's my longstanding position. He's been there and trenchment should be
reserved for constitutional issues. But I think
picking up on some of the things discussed here today. It is
open to the house to decide what those matters are there have
been some that are you know, traditionally regard that way that's not to say
they are sitting Stone and the only things that that could
be considered that way my submission
sets out the role speaker currently has in relation
to standing order 270 and Reserve provisions, and
I don't tend to go into that
just really to record the role that
speaker currently performs. What I would just like to talk about is
the method for dealing with proposals to
entrench and
I don't think that there should be a restriction
in standing orders.
Saying that Reserve Provisions were
entrenchment can only apply to constitutional matters. I don't think it's
necessary and I and I don't support elevation.
These Provisions above politics and this is a
political institution. You're all politicians you do politics. That's what
happens in the house. And I don't think we should pretend otherwise instead.
I think we should use the political system to scrutinize and
criticize and debate things and I
think
If we were to say that only constitutional matters
can be entrenched. Someone has to decide what they are. That
would be the speaker and the
currency and that would put the speaker in the middle of a really contentious
political debate. I don't think that's desirable and
I don't as I say don't think it's necessary. I think it's better for the
house to judge in each case whether proposal for
entrenchment is desirable and then to reach political settlement about
it. That's why we shouldn't try and take politics out of this
and I think that's often kind of used as a
you know, but if a suggestion it's about grubby to involve politics
and this but as I say you do politics, that's how that's how
this works.
And I think that approach has resulted to date and a
pretty enduring and agreed constitutional Norm.
Picking up on on what previous submitted as well
about having a pause. I think there's a way of doing that and my proposal for that is
that if there is a proposal to entrench a
provision it can only be done in a bill when it's introduced.
It can't be done in a bill. It's going to be passed under urgency.
It would just take the question on that within be out of order. It can't
be introduced a select committee or Committee of the whole house by sop
and that would enable the house to scrutinize
The Proposal from start for the
media and the public to be involved to have their say
on it to criticize it to
consider whether it's appropriate for interaction or not. Ultimately that's
what happens in the three Waters situation political judgment
is made in the end and you know,
the bill was very committed and it was removed and
I think that's fine. That's a good job good sort of judgment to
exercise. I just think it should happen right from the start. Then there
can be no suggestions being rushed or secret or hidden
and and it enables that political process
to work as it should.
And that's really my main point. I did have just a couple of supplementary things
that came up out of some of the other submissions. I thought
I'd cover quickly as well one is about I guess
the origins of standing order 270 at only
went into our standard orders in 1995 between that passage
of the elect 1956 and then didn't say
anything about it and standing was committee at
the time just made the point that it was up until 1995 or
50% a simple majority.
Could impose a requirement for
a super majority on future parlance, it gives
the example of 65% of 75% And since
it's not Equitable that a parliament could do that but I don't think you
can suggest that the standing was committee at the time was saying
that 75 was the only threshold that
could be allowed. They mentioned 65 as a possibility as
well one way of an example. I'm just that whatever your proposing
in the bill should be also what
it's carried by incoming at the whole house.
And then the final thing just I guess by way of a safeguard
this some brief discussion about what would happen. If a provision
was carried in Committee of the whole house, but not by that required super
majority. I think there's a couple of protections worked into
parliamentary procedure about that one is
there's a question about then whether if it was passed by a
Lisa majority. It's a simple majority whether the speaker would actually
put a question on adopting that report to the house because the
provision hadn't been properly carried.
If they did whether it be sit down for third reading because
again, it hasn't been properly dealt with and if the answer
both of those was yes, whether the bill would be
presented for Royal assent and prepared
by the Clark given that hasn't been properly passed by the house. So those
are you know, big judgments for someone in the future addressing the
Constitutional question.
But it is the speaker to decide whether the rules of the house
have been applied properly and whether the house is following the law because that's required
to do that. So, yeah, that's that. I'm
happy to answer questions. You must speaker.
Um, thank you just in terms of suggesting
that I could only include entrancement
could only be included in a bill at introduction.
That means that only The Government Can promote it another submitters
suggested that it go as long
as we went through a select committee process, which would then we do
politics in this place allow that transparency accountability
public submissions and the like so I was there
a slight education of that that is
I mean, I guess it reaches the same fundament, which is that
members have, you know, good notice this
is going to happen. So just bring those
Critical facilities to be I mean other members can introduce
legislation as well, but I admit that's difficult. Yeah. Mmm.
David your submission is silent on the question of the 75%
threshold. And and so you've
you've suggested that we don't need a definition of constitutional change.
And so assuming the amendment.
A different process was followed for the amendment that caused this
reflection was followed.
You could I could conceive a future where a similar
controversial policy based.
Amendment was passed by say
60% of the house 65% of the house.
Are you broadly comfortable with it?
I think I'm
Not but it's not really the thrust of the submission it
really it puts all of the responsibility for
that then on the political process. I suppose on public pressure
and disapproval if it's not something people agree
with I do think 75 is a used to threshold but I
just note that it's not one that standing orders
committee was particularly wedded to something we can think and if
I may start I'm interested I suppose in others
in the room might find this very attractive but I suppose that
the backstop there is that that and you know, the 60%
could then be undone by 50% in due
course that you know healing back and two wrongs
might make it right in that case according to political judgment. Yeah. I
mean, I think and that is one of the I suppose the concerns is that
you weaken single single
entrenchment if you think well, I don't really approve of that
policy, but we can buy back door means just under it. Anyway, that's
why I think it is useful if
it's reserved for things that the parliament degrees out really
important.
a question
When was the last time before three?
Is that an entrenchment provision came before
Parliament? The last one I can think of was they
there was a bill called? I think the bank bill
you in this bill in you keep kiwi Big Bill
in 2015. And that was going to require a kiwibank was
to be solved a 75% of members would
have to vote in favor and I made
a submission against that along these same lines. Well, not suggesting the
Royal change but second should British be for constitutional meters.
And they build and proceeded. I'm not supposed to be
here.
One final question
and you say you strongly support only being the Constitutional
matters, but also outlined quite a few issues with determining
what's constitutional or not. So why is
it that should only be for constitutional matters when
it seems that there's General acceptance that it would need a high degree of
parametric support I suppose.
How do I suppose part of the nature of my role is to think about
President history and that has been our parliament's approached
it. So I would be cautious about opening up more generally also about
binding future parliaments on policy proposals. But
I do want to leave that door open. It is up to Parliament to decide
in the end whether it should do this. I don't
think we should limit that by rules and you know,
as other submitters have said it could be other issues that are sufficiently
Constitution Below in there. I don't think it's limited to six.
right now
thank you very much. I'll just
stay here because I got a question to ask you finished the past
session.
well just